Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Dr. Richard Wolff. He's a
return guest, and today we're going to talk about
Marxism, dialectical materialism, and how we should approach them
intellectually, particularly as Marxists. So Dr. Wolff, welcome back
to the show. It's always a pleasure to talk
with you.
Likewise, a pleasure for me. I'm very, very happy
to be here and particularly to talk about these
issues.
Great, so, um, starting with, uh, Marxism, I mean,
intellectually, how do you approach it? Uh, IS it
a philosophy? Is it an economic theory? Is it
something else? I mean, or, or, I mean, does
it even matter under which kind of uh scientific
or academic discipline. It, it falls, uh, I mean,
how do you approach it basically?
OK, um, I approach it in a historical way
that I can summarize this way. Every social system
that we have any record of going back hundreds
or thousands of years. Every one of them has
had in the, in the society, people who think
it is wonderful, it is successful, it is a
lucky thing that the people living there and then
uh have this system within which to work and
to have a family and to live a life.
And in every society, there are people who don't
think that way, who believe that society could be
better organized, to be more successful, more happy, more
supportive of human life than the one they're living
in. In other words, societies always Generate self-criticism, that
is the criticism by people in a society of
that society. Marxism is the self-criticism of capitalism. It
is a body of thinking, a body of feeling,
a body of action, of experiments of all kinds
by people who share a basic idea that capitalism.
IS something we can do better than. But let
me give it very concretely. Slavery, which has existed
in various parts of the world at various times.
WAS often welcomed and celebrated by masters, uh, but
it was criticized often by slaves. They had a
different attitude, and the slaves particularly thought hm that
there maybe could be a better arrangement, for example,
if they were free and not slaves, occurred to
them, and then they made eventually the demands. And
the struggles and the ideas that led the human
race to say no more slavery. Mhm. OK. In
feudalism, the, the system in Europe from say 500
to, to, to the Renaissance, that period, we saw
lords and serfs, and the lords thought it was
wonderful, and the serfs, not so much. And in
the end, I'm making it simple, of course, the
serfs had the idea, we can do better than
feudalism, we can do better than the, and then
we had capitalism. Marxism is one of, not the
only one, but one of the critical perspectives. Particularly
embraced by the working class, which has the idea
we could do better. Than the system we are
living in. They are critics, they are opponents. Now,
in order to make it clear, we have to
then, and I have to do this, explain what
we mean by capitalism. Well, here, it's very interesting.
The critics of capitalism don't agree on what capitalism
is. That shouldn't surprise you. The critics of feudalism
didn't agree either, and the critics of slavery didn't
agree either. The critics of capitalism are very interesting
group. One of them, Marxism. HAS, at least so
far, been by far the biggest and most successful
tradition of criticism that capitalism has generated. When people
say to me, uh, uh, Marxism uh will disappear,
I laugh. Marxism won't disappear until capitalism does, because
Marxism is the self-criticism of capitalism. If you believe
that capitalism is strong and that capitalism has a,
a big future in our world, Then I'm afraid
I have to tell you that that's good news
for Marxism, because Marxism is the critique of this
system. Now, even among Marxists, there's disagreement. I'm gonna
just mention one or two to get us clear
here. One group of Marxists, perhaps the one most
people know, Looks at capitalism and focuses on an
interesting aspect, namely that capitalism as it emerged out
of feudalism, starting in England in the 16th century
and spreading to Europe and eventually becoming the global
system it is today, they focus on the fact
that it was private individuals. Who's established capitalist enterprises
and who built them up until they were able
to make it the dominant system. And for them,
the critique of capitalism that they articulate, what they
find wanting, which we can talk about, but for
them, the solution that Marxism is interested in is
replacing private enterprise. With social or government or public
enterprise. And I'm sure the audience knows what I'm
talking about, because if you look around at many
socialist parties or communist parties around, say, Europe, Including
in Portugal and Spain and so on, these are
political parties that emphasize what the government should do
to control the market or to shape the behavior
of enterprises or perhaps to run certain enterprises itself
like the university, like the hospital, like and so
forth. That's not that part. That's not the kind
of Marxism I find persuasive. I'm more of a
different perspective, and the pers which I believe is
now growing because the perspective on private versus state
is kind of shrinking, which is normal. The different
critical views of capitalism move and change over time,
just like the critical views of feudalism did in
the past and so on. So here's mine. For
me, what's unique about capitalism is not that the
state can be the employer that the state can
regulate versus private. I understand that that's a difference.
I take it seriously, but it's not what defines
capitalism for me. What defines it for me is
a particular way of organizing the workplace, the factory,
the office, the store, where people get together to
produce the goods and services that an economy generates.
I find capitalism to be a unique way of
organizing the workplace. It takes, here's how it works.
A very small group of people sit at the
top. Of a capitalist enterprise, the owner. The person
who started the enterprise. If it's a modern corporation,
the board of directors of the enterprise, they are
the ones who make all the key decisions. They
have the power. They are the ones who decide
what gets produced, what technology is used, where the
production takes place, and what is done with the
output or the revenue if you sell the output,
what is done with it. They are the people
who run the system, and they have a name,
employers. The rest of the people, the vast majority
of the people who come to work in a
factory or an office or a store are employees.
They sell their capacity to work to the employer.
That's what makes it different from feudalism, because in
feudalism, the serf didn't sell his or her labor
to the lord. That was not the relationship. Same
thing in slavery, the, the slave didn't sell his
ability to work because he did not own it.
He was a slave. His capacity to work was
owned by his master. So, capitalism is the system
of employer-employee. Now, this is very important because, for
example, it means that I'm not very interested in
whether the employer is a private person or a
governmental official. That's an interesting difference. I'm not saying
it doesn't make a difference. It does. But it's
not crucial because what the state enterprise and the
private enterprise have in common, what they both do
in the same way is organized into a minority
that controls and a majority that is controlled, even
to the point that the employer has the control
to say to the employee, If you don't do
what I want, I will fire you. I will
take away your job, I will take away your
income. I will plunge you and your family into
all the difficulties. Whereas what can you do? If
you don't like me as an employer, you can
quit, but then you're gonna go have to find
what? Another employer. So you're not free of this
system, but I am free to, to control you.
For me, and let me be real clear here,
this is an unbearable arrangement. I find this as
outrageous as any slave ever found slavery or any
serf ever found. Vandalism. This is undemocratic, my God,
a capitalist enterprise is an example of the absence
of democracy. It is an autocracy, a tiny group
of people. In our country here in the United
States, we refer to them as the CEO, the
chief executive officer of a corporation. I make a
joke when I travel the country giving speeches. I
say we thought we killed kings years ago when
monarchy was ended mostly in around the world. And
the only monarchs that remain are figureheads. They're not
real political dominant characters. We thought we had gotten
rid of them, as in the French Revolution with
the guillotine. But they fooled us. They changed their
names. And now we have them, only we call
them CEOs because inside the corporation, the CEO functions
like a king. You are his subject. He tells
when you enter the workplace in the morning at
8 o'clock Monday through Friday, he tells you, your
employer, where to sit. What machine to use, what
to do, how to do it, how quick to
do it? When can you go to the toilet?
When can you have your lunch? When you must
come back. And at the end of the day,
after you have done what he has told you
to do. He tells you to go home and
to leave it at the workplace everything you poured
your brains and your muscles into that is out
of rage for me. That's why I'm a critic,
and Marxism is the theory. And the practice and
the experiments of trying, here we go, trying to
move the society in the direction where this is
no longer the case. The, the, the, the Marxist
says, I want to do better than capitalism. But
he doesn't want to give up the machines that
capitalism developed. He doesn't want to give up the
achievements that capitalism had, of course not, any more
than capitalism wanted to give up the, the, the
discoveries that slavery made and so forth. We build
on the previous system, but we do better. And
Marxism is sophisticated. Let, let, let me remind people,
Marx dies in 1883, so that means we have
about 150 years since Marx died, roughly. During that
time, his way of criticizing capitalism has produced Marxist.
Trade unions, Marxist political parties, Marxist publishing houses, Marxist
professors, Marx, unbelievable growth in 150 years, I can
make the following statement. Every single country on the
face of the earth has Marxists in it. Doing
all kinds of things. You know, the People's Republic
of China has a government that says it's Marxist.
Whatever you think of that government is another matter,
but Marxism is a very powerful critical tradition in
global capitalism. And I should say that capitalism had
its greatest growth, not in the period from 1600
to 1850. But it has had its most spectacular
growth since 1850. The last 150 to 175 years
have been the growth of capitalism to be a
global system. And just as Marx explained, that would
be the best possible conditions for Marxism. To develop
So here's the irony. Marxism is the strongest, most
developed, largest critical tradition of capitalism. If you are
aware, as I hope most people are, That capitalism,
like every other system. Was born, evolved over time,
and then passes away. That's what happens to every
other system. There is no reason to believe that
capitalism will not show the same pattern. If it
does, and I believe it already is, if it
shows a decline. And in the United States and
Western Europe, decline is what capitalism is now experiencing.
The likely inheritor of that decline, the likely way
of thinking and organizing. In that decline will be
whichever critical tradition developed the most during capitalism. And
that's more, which means I make you, not a
prediction, I don't believe in that, but a logical
inference from what I've said. That the future, the
future of capitalism as it declines. WILL be the
emergence of a new system. And that new system
will be characterized by the democratization of the workplace,
the transformation of factories, offices, and stores from top-down
autocratic organization to a horizontal democratic organization where everybody
in the workplace has one vote. And we decide
by majority rule. What the company produces, what the
technology will be, where the production will happen, and
what will be done with the output. That's where
we're going, and I would argue, we're gonna go
there in England, and we're gonna go there in
Portugal, and we're gonna go there in India and
China too. Each in their own way, each at
their own pace, each with their own history and
religion and traditions, but that capitalism emerged out of
feudalism, feudalism emerged out of slavery, and this future
that I described, the democratization of the enterprise. Socialism,
if you like, will emerge out of the decline
of capitalism.
OK, but as I said at the beginning, I
also want to ask you about specifically about dialectical
materialism. I mean, how do you look at the
relationship or the role that dialectical materialism plays within
Marxism, and do you think of it as a
form of scientific endeavor?
OK, good. Let me begin at the end of
what you just said. I don't know what the
word endeavor means. I mean, it dialectical materialism is
an approach to understanding the world. It is a
way of doing scientific research. There are other ways,
uh, there's no unique way. Uh, IN my judgment,
there's no right and wrong way. Uh, HOW you
do science for me is very similar to how
you organize eating or how you dance, or what
kind of music you produce and enjoy in your
society. Human beings, thankfully, differ. They do all those
things differently. You know, uh, my family is of
French origin. My father was born in France. So,
for example, I love French cuisine. The French are
very good at food and wine, as you know,
as are, of course, the Portuguese. AS well, but
I love French cuisine, and it's different from American
cuisine. I live in America. I regret that American
cuisine is not French cuisine, never has been, and
I doubt ever will be. OK, so for me,
dialectical materialism is one way to do scientific research.
OK, what does it mean? Well, to, to get
at this, you need to know just very briefly
about the history of philosophy. One of the questions
That philosophers who've thought about this for thousands of
years, one of the things they've wondered about is
what is the relationship. Between what they call material
reality, you know, the hard reality of the weather
and the soil and the wind, and, and, you
know, the, the things we can touch, this can
or this shirt that I'm wearing, the material aspect
of life. You know, we are material beings, we
are born, we evolve, and then we go back,
you know, it was Ash Wednesday the other day,
we go back to the soil from which we
come. And philosophers have differentiated that part of reality
from something else, which they call ideas. These are
thoughts that the human organ of the brain creates,
the idea of something being beautiful, or the idea
of something being dangerous. Human beings construct ideas. And
so philosophers have said, What is the, have asked
themselves, what is the relationship between material reality. And
the ideas human beings create. Now, some people look
at this question slightly differently. They think that ideas
Actually come from another realm of the world. And
they call that realm God. Or religion. Or the
heaven, or spirit, or lots of words for it,
but it comes from somewhere else into us. And
it shapes who we are and what we do.
Our ideas govern our behavior. And in the religious
way of thinking, Our ideas that govern our behavior
come from God, because God, as is written early
in the Bible in Genesis, is the beginning of
everything. God created the material and God created the
ideas, and indeed, God is Himself an idea. And
it shows you that the ideas of the world
are what make everything else happen. And the word
for this way of thinking is called idealism. Ideas
govern reality. Now, there were philosophers all the way
back to the ancient Greeks who disagreed with this
perspective. Who said, yes, there's a material reality and
there's an ideal reality, that's true, but it is
not true for them that the idea governs the
material. They have the opposite view. They think the
material governs the idea. In other words, the ideas
that take shape in your mind. ARE the result
of the influence on your brain of the weather
and what you eat and the work you do
and the relationships you have with other people, etc.
So for them, the material shapes the ideal. And
those people over time, got the name materialists to
differentiate them from the idealists who saw it the
other way. For Marx, who was a student of
philosophy, just to remind everyone, Marx's education was as
a philosophy student. He got his doctoral degree as
a philosophy student. He wrote his doctoral dissertation about
Epictetus and Epicurus, ancient Greek philosophers. And his first
job was as a professor of philosophy, not of
economics. So, he knew what he was talking about
when he dealt in this area. He said, I
have a different pos position. And he, he said,
I am not an idealist. And I'm not a
materialist in a way I'll explain in a minute.
I'm something else. And then he gave great credit
to his teacher. A very important German philosopher, Marx
studied in Germany. He was born in what is
now France, the city of Metz, uh, or near
there, uh, but It, it was German culture that
he came to. Actually, if I was a mistake,
he wasn't born in Metz. He was born in
Trev or Trier. It's a German, uh, French border.
Anyway. He very carefully said, I don't believe that
it's idealism over materialism or vice versa. Instead, I
believe there is a, here we go, dialectical relationship
between ideas and material reality. Each of them shapes
the other. It is an empty exercise which one
shapes the other. They both shape each other. The
way we think shapes how we act, and how
we act shapes how we think, and they're both
always, here we come now, changing each other. And
so in Marxian dialectical materialism, You always study or
try to in your scientific research, you try to
understand how the way we think shapes the material
reality you're studying and how that material reality shapes
how you're thinking. It is a very self-conscious way
of conducting scientific research. It is, if you know
the language, the coming together of epistemology, the study
of thought, and ontology, the study of how the
world works. Those two things are intertwined. That's what
makes it dialectical, as in the word dialogue, interaction.
That's what dialectics comes from in the ancient Greek.
So it, it's a particular Marxist way of thinking.
I like, if you're interested in the way modern
European Marxists have tried the best of them to
develop this idea of dialectical materialism. And the ones
who went the furthest with it. Were the Hungarian
Marxist Georg Lukac. The Italian Marxist, Antonio Gramsci and
the French Marxist Luis Altusa. But the interesting thing
is all three of them, Luca, Gramsci, and Altusa.
All found the idea that they could develop for
their way of understanding Marxist dialectical materialism. They found
it in the work of Sigmund Freud. Sigmund Freud's
first book is called The Interpretation of Dreams. It's
available in all European languages. It is a fundamental
classic in the literature of psychology. In that book,
Freud analyzes dreams. How do you interpret the dreams
human beings have? And as he does it, he
analyzes, here we go now, how the lived material
reality of a person shapes his or her dreams
during the night. And then how the dreams shape
the reality around the person. This for them was
a scientific person, Freud, a medical doctor, trying to
understand the medical, the uh mental problems of his
patients using without knowing it. The dialectical method of
Marx to understand dreams. So they took this, Lukach
did, Gramsci did, and Altusayer and said, look, here
we can see. A way to do this kind
of research where our scientific work embodies the notion
that material shapes ideal and ideal material all at
the same time in the universal process of everything
changing. I hope that's clear.
Mhm. No, right, I, I want to ask you,
I, I think we will, we will probably have
time for just one more question, but I want
to ask you then, uh, since scientific knowledge keeps
e. Evolving and we've just talked about dialectical materialism
as a way of thinking, as a, as a
way of approaching science, of approaching reality since scientific
knowledge keeps evolving. How should Marxists approach Marxism in
the sense that, for example, if Karl Marx, Friedrich
Engels, if Lenin, if Trotsky, and other theorists. Got
things wrong if they made claims about what we
would now classify as anthropology or sociology or economics
or history or whichever other kind of discipline if
they made erroneous claims that with scientific developments we
now know are not correct. I mean, how should
Marxists deal with that and with the evolving aspect
of scientific knowledge.
They should learn the following lesson. If what was
thought to be true in the past has later
been shown not to be true. Then they should
draw from that recognition the humility. To be aware
that what they believe now may also be untrue.
That that's the nature of science. It's always finding
out that the world is different from what they
thought it meant. And the best way to understand
it. That I know of, takes me back to
Marx's teacher. Hagel Who is famous for having said.
You can never step in the same river twice.
Why? Because between the 1st and the 2nd time,
both you and the river have changed. So, be
aware that you are trying to understand something, and
you are using the scientific. World achievements to do
that. And that's what you should do. But it
is always incomplete. When you are trying to explain
something, you can begin, and by the way, this
is the key concept of Sigmund Freud's interpretation of
dreams, just like it's the key concept in the
work of Louis Altusa. It's the notion of overdetermination
in French, sur determination. And it's a simple idea.
That anything that happens in the world, a rising
interest rate, a war, an idea that occurs to
you, a piece of music is overdetermined by an
infinity of influences. If we want to know why
Ricardo Lopes. THINKS or looks the way he does,
the answer is, he thinks the way he does.
Well, let me tell you about his mother. Let
me look at how his father worked, let me
look at his boyfriend, his girlfriend, he, he, his
teachers, the books he read, the, the movies he
saw, the sports he participate. I could go on
forever. All of those factors, each in their own
way, helped shape Ricardo Lopes, or me, or anybody
else or any event. To say that I'm gonna
use science to explain why something happens immediately confronts
you with the problem. To explain something would require
you to show all of the infinity of factors
that made it happen. But infinity is too big.
You as a scientist will die before you get
through. And therefore, here we go now, from a
dialectical Marxist perspective. No one has ever finally explained
anything. It's not possible. We don't have the capacity
to do that with or without a computer. It
won't make a difference. We can't. We invented God
because we need to imagine what it is no
human being can ever do, and that's what God
is. It's that which is beyond. So, all explanations
are incomplete, therefore, all explanations are open to revision.
So yes, of course, there are things we think
now that make us say, as you did, this
statement by Karl Marx is rejected. We don't think
that's correct. OK, fine. That's what science is. It
makes those judgments all the time, and so it
should. As long as we don't imagine. That we
can do what Karl Marx couldn't. We can get
to the truth that will be forever. That's crazy
from a Marxist perspective, and that's not good for
science. You study, you use your apparatus to make
sense of the world. Do it. It's interesting. We
will learn from it. But to make the epistemological
claim that you have the truth once and for
all. You know what that is? That's ironically the
Stalinism that these same people criticize. The Russians form.
It's not, it, it is an attempt. I say
this as a scientist myself. It's an attempt to
shut down science, to say that science is now
finished because we have the truth. No, we don't.
We're constantly correcting what people before us did, and
that's fine. But the notion that we get ever
closer to the final absolute truth. That is actually.
And the, and the person who captured this most
is Antonio Gramsci, the Italian Marxist, and that's a
religious person. That's just God sneaking back into the
dialectical materialist conversation. God is the final absolute truth.
It is, and it should be understood as the
creation by human beings of the boundary that separates
human thought from something that human thought is not,
namely, absolute truth. We invent the concept because we
don't, we can't get there. It's, it, it's important
to understand, and by the way, if any of
this is of interest to anyone. Then the Marxist
tradition is where you need to go. You need
to read this material. These people, Gramsci in Italy,
Lukach in Hungary, Altus, and many others. I, I
don't mean to only those three, many, many others,
including in Spain and Portugal and so forth, have
worked on these issues. And out of these issues
comes an awareness. And for those of you who
know my work, uh, dealing with the geopolitics of
the time we live in now, if you have
found my work and that of others who are
Marxists interesting. Then please understand, it's not us. We
didn't do this. We are using the Marxist apparatus
to do our work. We are grateful to all
that that apparatus taught us. Do we still make
mistakes? Of course. Do we still say things which
other people will find to be erroneous? Yes, we
do. And I look forward, as long as I'm
alive to learn from those who can teach me
where I made a logical mistake or I misunderstood
some fact or other. I, I'm interested in exchanging
these ideas, but as a Marxist, I know that
the system in which I live and work. Is
frightened of me. Tries to stop me from functioning.
For those of you who don't know me, I'm
malfunctioning in the United States, but that's because the
United States has changed. The prohibition on Marxists and
socialists is weaker now in the United States than
it has been in my entire lifetime. I have
a bigger audience than I could ever have before,
and that's, by the way, mainly because capitalism in
the United States is in a period of serious
decline, and millions and millions of our people know
it. And as they live through it, which is
what's happening to us. Questions are being raised, like
what comes after capitalism? What happens if this decline
continues? For the next few years. What does it
mean that China and the BRICS is a larger
economic unit than the United States and the G7?
What does that mean? Why is the United States
In the situation it's in, having become the bully
of the world, having produced a leader that the
whole rest of the world looks at as if
he were crazy. Why is it that the countries
on either side of us, Canada and Mexico, are
arming themselves out of fear of the military attack
of the United States? That's never been true before.
This is a country in serious decline. Left and
right, everywhere. I live in New York City. We
now have a mayor who was elected a couple
of months ago. Who is a socialist Muslim. The
the mayor of the city of New York. We've
never had such a thing before. And he was
elected overwhelmingly. It wasn't close. I live in New
York City. My neighbors are talking to me with
great excitement about our new socialist mayor, a very
nice young man. And the fact that he's a
Muslim. Didn't bother them at all. Even though the
president is denouncing Islam and Muslims in the crudest,
ignorant way imaginable. Here in New York City, our
president counts for exactly nothing. If he ran for
office here, he would get elected to nothing. These
are signs of a society. That's disintegrating, which is
what's going on, and that means That there is
a resurgence of people who are asking. Why is
this happening? Where is this going? What is my
future? What are the futures of my children? And
in that conversation, we Marxists have a lot to
offer, and so people are interested. They don't all
agree. I can't convince everybody, not at all. But
I can speak. I am part of the conversation
in this country, and I must tell you, It
is a wonderful experience. I'm having in many ways,
the time of my life. Instead of being a
professor in a college or university with a dozen
students in a seminar room. I'm on radio and
television all the time. I have my own program,
weekly program that is global, etc. ETC. So, it
is, it is a time when Marxism is coming
back into its own, and for the best of
reasons, because the object of its critique, capitalism, is
in ever deepening trouble. The alliance between Europe and
America is over. The Europeans are trying to figure
out what to do. They're not doing a very
good job of it. They obsess about Russia in
a way that is strange, to say the least.
Meanwhile, Russia and China have come closer together than
ever before, which is what Europe and America had
hoped to avoid. Not only did they not avoid
it, they helped make it happen. This is a
sign of a system that's falling apart. Uh I
don't want the suffering that comes from that. I'm
very fearful about that. We are all wondering in
the United States whether our government is about to
go to war in Iran with all the implications
that might have, particularly for countries in the southern
half of Europe like Portugal. So, and we share
that with you, but for Marxism, this is a
good time in the United States, better than we've
had uh in my lifetime, and I have white
hair.
OK, so Dr. Wolff, let's wrap up the interview
here because I'm noticing that we're reaching our time
limit here and I'm very, I'm getting very mindful
of your time. And as always, I will be
leaving links in the description to democracy at work,
to your books, to, I mean. Every week I
watch your economic update show and your wolf response
show. So thank you so much for doing those
and thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show again. It's always a
big pleasure to talk with you.
Well, it's a pleasure. As I said, it's a
pleasure for me too. I appreciate programs like yours.
THAT have the courage and the interest to develop
these kinds of, of hour-long conversations. So we're not
limited to the twelve-second soundbite and we can actually
go into the material. So if you want to
do it again in the future, please don't hesitate.
I'd be happy to talk with you again.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inasi Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herz Agnon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and
Samuel Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel,
Sardusran, David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego
Londono Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro,
Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Eddin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony
Smith, and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg
Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin,
David Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D.
Lee Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber,
Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Ebert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali
Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A
special thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank
Lucas Stinnik, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro,
Al Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.